# Transliteration: *The Final Project*

(Joyce Lee, Adnaan Mukadam, Dennis Sell, Terry Sun)

Transliteration is the task of transcribing a word or phrase originally composed in one writing system to another in an understandable form.  Transliteration is used to translate "out of vocabulary" (OOV) words in the source language, which have no actual translation to the target language. Proper nouns - people, placess, and organizations - are the major source of OOVs, making transliteration a crucial problem, since they contain . For example, proper nouns make up [40% of search queries and over 70% of most searches](http://anthology.aclweb.org///D/D08/D08-1107.pdf) and are especially important in interlingual communication in the global media.

This problem manifests between any two languages, even those who employ the same writing system, as it is desired to represent differences in pronunciations. It is even more crucial when moving between writing systems, as the source and target languages may have sets of phonemes that do not map bijectively. That is, the source and target languages may each contain phonemes that do not exist in the other language, but also be missing phonemes from the other language.

> Side note: linguistically, transliteration actually refers to a map between graphemes (units of a writing system) rather than phonemes (units of a language's sound base); _transcription_ is a more accurate term for what you're doing in this assignment. However, in the machine translation literature, transcription typically refers to converting speech to text representation rather than text to text.

The results of transcription and transliteration are often quite similar, as letters represent similar sounds in many languages. However, transcription does not try to maintain a bijective map between letters of two writing scripts in order to better represent pronunciation in the target language. This introduces ambiguity and increases the difficulty of back-transliteration into the source language, but results in a clearer form in the target language that can be understood and pronounced without an understanding of the source language.

## Arabic-English Transliteration

Arabic to English transliteration is a particularly interesting problem since the writing scripts and phoneme sets of the two languages are particularly disparate. Additionally, the Arabic writing system may omits vowels, optionally using diacritics to resolve disambiguities.

In this assignment, we will actually be considering the problem of back-transliteration: most of the Arabic text originated as English words, which were then transliterated into Arabic. This simplifies the approach for this assignment without losing the general gist of the problem (and introduces other ambiguities).

Some examples:

* 'محمد' would be rendered as 'Muhammad' in the Roman alphabet.
* 'عامر' would be 'Amir'
* 'فايز' would be 'Fayiz'
* 'حكيم' would be 'Hakeem'

### Getting Started
Run the default transliteration system:

```
./default > default.out
```

The default system assumes a monotonic, one-to-one mapping between characters in the source and target languages. From the training data, it builds a probability map for each Arabic character to the English characters that is most commonly transliterated into. Then, for each character in a test word, it simply chooses the most probable English character.

However, as we discussed above, the one-to-one assumption of the default system is not always the best assumption to make when designing a transliteration system.

```
./grade < default.out
```

The output of your transliteration system will be graded against a reference transliteration using the [Levenshtein edit distance](wiki), which awards a penalty for each single-character edit (insertion, deletion, or replacement) that must be made to the first string so that it matches the second string.

  [wiki]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levenshtein_distance

Alternatively, you can also directly pipe the output into the grader:

```
./default | ./grade
```

The training data is provided in `arabic.train`, consisting of 14000 pairs of English and Arabic transliterations. These pairs were taken from Chris Callison-Burch's data set (from [Transliterating From All Languages][tfal]), and were originally generated by scraping Wikipedia article names.

  [tfal]: http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~ccb/publications/transliterating-from-all-languages.pdf

You have 1600 lines of Arabic testing data in `ar-pub.test`. The corresponding English transliterations have been provided for the first 800 lines in `en-pub.test`, so you may score yourself. The remainder will be used to calculate an official score for your submission. For your submission, you should include all 1600 lines so that we can grade appropriately.

### The Challenge

Your task is to **minimize the edit distance** of the English transliteration.

To reach baseline, start by extending the default system by:

1. Adding nulls when matching characters between the languages.
2. Allow characters from the source language to map to multiple characters in the other and vice versa.

(Subject to revision.)

To improve beyond this, there are many different approaches that one may take, from using a phonetic intermediary representaton to spelling- or phrase-based algorithms.

An overview of transliteration can be found in [A Comparsion of Different Transliteration Models."](http://arxiv.org/pdf/1110.1391v1.pdf)(2006), which compares hybrid, grapheme-, phoneme-, and correspondence-based systems. Some ideas are:

* [“Automatic Transliteration of Proper Nouns from Arabic to English.”](http://www.cs.sfu.ca/~anoop/papers/pdf/caasl2.pdf)
* [“Machine Transliteration of Names in Arabic Text.”](http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1118642)
* [“Lightly Supervised Transliteration for Machine Translation.”](http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/E09-1050)
* Comparing different [transliteration systems](http://www.cis.upenn.edu/~ccb/publications/transliterating-from-all-languages.pdf)
* Also, consider **Koehn Section 10.1** as a resource. Although it is not necessarily recommended to use phonemes as an intermediary step as the book suggests, it may provide some insight into modifications to the statistical methods suggested above.

Ground Rules
------------

* You must work **independently** on this assignment.

* You should submit each of the following:

  1.  An alignment of the entire dataset, uploaded from any Eniac or Biglab machine
      using the command `turnin -c cis526 -p hw5 hw5.txt`.
      You may submit new results as often as you like, up until the assignment deadline.
      The output will be evaluated using a secret metric,
      but the `grade` program will give you a good idea of how well you're doing.
      The top few positions on the leaderboard will receive bonus points on this assignment.

  2.  Your code, uploaded using the command `turnin -c cis526 -p hw5-code file1 file2 ...`.
      This is due 24 hours after your leaderboard submission.
      You are free to extend the code we provide or write your own in whatever
      langugage you like, but the code should be self-contained,
      self-documenting, and easy to use.

  3.  A report describing the models you designed and experimented with, uploaded
      using the command `turnin -c cis526 -p hw5-report hw5-report.pdf`. This is
      due 24 hours after your leaderboard submission. Your report does not need to be
      long, but it should at minimum address the following points:

      * **Motivation**: Why did you choose the models you experimented with?

      * **Description of models or algorithms**: Describe mathematically or algorithmically what you did.
        Your descriptions should be clear enough that someone else in the class could implement them.
        If you used any papers, you should reference them and (potentially) describe any differences
        in your implementation; if you used any outside MT systems, you should describe them.

      * **Results**: You most likely experimented with various settings of any models you implemented.
        We want to know how you decided on the final model that you submitted for us to grade.
        Most importantly: what did you learn?

      Since we have already given you a concrete problem and dataset, you do not
      need describe these as if you were writing a full scientific paper. Instead,
      you should focus on an accurate technical description of the above items.

      Note: These reports will be made available via hyperlinks on the leaderboard.
      Therefore, **you are not required to include your real name** if you would prefer not
      to do so.

* You may only use data or code outside of what is provided _with advance
  permission_. We will ask you to make your resources available to everyone.
  You should not used any pre-existing transliteration systems. However, you
  aree to use external alignment or translation systems.

Any questions should be be posted on the
[course Piazza page](https://piazza.com/upenn/spring2015/cis526).
